Project outline:

Tick based user-script driven strategy game, where user-scripts define settlement generation and non-player character behaviour.

The gameworld is split into two factions, each with their own domain - the underworld and overworld. The domains are split into tessellated hexagonal tiles.

Mechanics:

Vision of tiles is based upon vision distance, relative tile height, and line of sight. A unit or building's special ability may reveal distant tiles, or prevent special vision.

Tiles may be either be "soft" or "hard" claimed. A soft claim is generated by resource harvesting or military occupation, a hard claim is generated by structures.

Resource tiles are grouped into zones, which may only be soft claimed based on activity in the zone.

Soft claim grants player progression metrics, scaled by exploitation per time period. Only the player with the greatest exploitation may gain progression metrics.

Hard claim grants vision, player progression metrics, expanded available build radius, blocking of competing player buildings.

Player progression unlocks new structures, unit types, structure and unit abilities.

Structure types:

Residence (House, Spawning Pit)
- Creates basic peon unit.
- Increases maximum unit production limit.

Farmstead (Overworld Only)
- Creates relevant units after upgrades.
- Can be staffed by unit.
- Creates primary and secondary resources.

Workshop (Smithy, Hellforge)
- Creates relevant units after upgrades.
- Can be staffed by unit.
- Creates secondary resources.

Storage
- Cold Store
- Grain Silo
- Trade Yard
- Treasury

Unit types:

Peon: 
- Farmer 
- Huntsman -> Pathfinder
- Forager      
- Miner
- Builder 
- Warrior
- Cleric


Resource harvesting:

Wood:
- Overworld only.
- For basic construction and production.
- From trees. Can be burned, can be replanted.

Stone:
- Found in both domains.
- For basic construction and production.
- Can be found in loose stone piles in caves or produced by mines.

Metals:
- Found in both domains.
- For basic construction and production.
- From ores. Found on surface, in caves or by creating mines on viable terrain.
- The domains are a number of "layers" apart when mining. A sufficiently levelled mine may either cave in (in the case of mining directly into an open space) or create a route between the overworld and underworld. A mine may intentionally be caved in with either magic, explosives, or at the cost of sacrificial miners. A caved in mine is reduced to level 0 at both ends but will regenerate resources.

Gems:
- Underworld and sufficiently deep mines and caves only.
- For magic, production and upgrades.

Food:
- Found in both domains.
- Unit lifespans can be extended by food consumption.
- Overworld players have access to significantly more food, at the cost of more expensive and durable units.
- Underworld players can generate food from fallen units.
- Overworld: Farmed, hunted and foraged from meadows, woodlands, fungal caves, and waterways.
- Underworld: Cannibalised, stolen and foraged from fungal caves, and waterways.


Expected initial Overworld gameplay loop:
- Player spawns with a single residence and a single peon within n distance from initial resources - wood and food.
- The player produces peon units at cost of food to harvest resources.
- Player uses peon to spend resources on new structures - workshop, storage, farmsteads, additional residences.

Expected continuation:
- The player has a growing economy of food and wood but little access to gems and no access to metal.
- Peons are sent to train professions at specific structures to further exploit local resources.
- The player can now begin to mine, creating availability of upgrades and new structures and units but increasing the risk of breaching into the Underworld.

Expected intial Underworld gameplay loop:
- Player spawns with a single residence and three peons within n distance from inital resources - stone and food.
- The player produces peon units at cost of food to harvest resources.
- Player uses peon to spend resources on new structures - workshop, storage, farmsteads, additional residences.
- Underworld peons require no upgrades to mine, and are expected to begin mining almost immediately, searching for routes to the Overworld via deep caves.

Expected continuation:
- The player has a growing economy of stone, metals and gems, but relatively limited access to food and no access to wood, allowing only the cheapest unit productions.
- Overworld connections should be found, where Overworld food and wood resources allow for new structure upgrades and better unit production.
